docs: add ADR for pseudo-private-custom-properties (#1172)
StackExchange/Stacks: adrs/0001-pseudo-private-custom-properties.md

# Refactor component styling using pseudo-private custom properties

> **Date:** [2022-11-03]

Reviewer: Maybe before merging the PR we should add a link here to this PR for future reference (see ADR template). 🙂

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Date:** 2022-11-03

**Related PR:** #1172
```

### Issue
Component styles are difficult to maintain. This is due to:

> 1. Disjointed styles .less files amongst components. Within components, we currently sometime will output contextual, variant, modifier, interaction styles with the base component class and sometimes we don’t. These styles will might be in alphabetical order, by some logical order, in the order added, or seemingly randomly. Many component style .less files include a large preamble and table of contents that are seldom updated to reflect the current state of the component. 

Reviewer: > Many component style .less files include a large preamble and table of contents that are seldom updated to reflect the current state of the component.

For my understanding: do PPCPs have self documenting characteristics as well?

Author: The way they're implemented in Stacks, yes. Specifically, the custom properties adhere to a naming convention to make them as clear as possible. They follow this format (all groups after the prefix separated by `-`):

- `--_` prefix to indicate it's a PPCP
- two-letter abbreviation of the component (if the component name is comprised of multiple words, I take the first letter of the first two words, otherwise user the first two letters of the component name)
- the child component name if applicable
- atomic class equivalent abbreviation or name if it exists, otherwise the logical name of the property
- interactive state if applicable

Examples:

- `--_ba-bc`: `border-color` on `.s-badge`
- `--_lp-footer-fd`: `flex-direction` on `.s-link-preview .s-link-preview--footer` 
- `--_ta-bg-hover`: `background-color` on `.s-tag` when hovering

I took this approach to make discerning the property's purpose obvious and to prevent collisions. I generally prefer self-documenting code with some support from short, inline comments over verbose code comments and find that in practice, large comments tend to get outdated often and can become a liability. Like most things, it depends, but that's my general feeling.

Should I include these details in the ADR or is that overkill?

Reviewer: Thanks for explaining Dan. 🙂

You read my mind. These details/conventions we started using should be part of the "Decision" section of the ADR in my opinion.

Agree with you about self documenting code (or even using tests as documentation) before resorting to long comments. 👍

Author: It just occurred to me that linking to [`lib/css/components/_styles-template.less`](https://github.com/StackExchange/Stacks/blob/develop/lib/css/components/_styles-template.less) would probably make sense here _**or**_ if we're ok with these ADRs being verbose, I could add the contents of that file here and remove the file itself. Thoughts?

Reviewer 2: I vote to add it into the ADR in a language tagged code block. Imo, we should aim to keep unshippable code out of the core library folders as best we can (sometimes it's unavoidable, but it's my personal philosophy).

Something like the following:

~~~markdown
```less
.s-component-name {
    //...
}
```
~~~

Reviewer: I agree with Ben. I wonder if there is an opportunity to remove the template file from that lib folder now that we have dedicated section for architecture decisions. 🤔

> 1. Disjointed styles .less files amongst components. Within components, we currently sometime will output contextual, variant, modifier, interaction styles with the base component class and sometimes we don’t. These styles will might be in alphabetical order, by some logical order, in the order added, or seemingly randomly. Many component style .less files include a large preamble and table of contents that are seldom updated to reflect the current state of the component. 

Reviewer: > Disjointed styles .less files amongst components. Within components, we currently sometime will output contextual, variant, modifier, interaction styles with the base component class and sometimes we don’t.

How complicated would be to add a simple snippet example from one of our files? Sometimes few lines of code are easier to digest than words. 🙂

Author: Oh, I should have proofread this! It's tough to understand. I'll give this section an edit. A snippet might be tough, since the issue could be quite verbose, but I'll give it a shot.

Thanks for pointing this out!

2. Complex cascade for component styles within variants, modifiers and theme contexts. This makes scanning .less files cumbersome, maintaining styles difficult, and changes liable to cause regressions.

### Decision

> Defining a structure for component styles using pseudo-private custom properties (PPCP) addresses the issues and includes a few other benefits:

Reviewer: > addresses the issues

So if we add a snippet highlighting the problem in the issue section can we have here the same snippet with PPCPs applied so that the reader can see at a glance the improvement?

Author: Good idea! I'll try to work that in.

- **Increase consistency within our codebase**. This is not specific to PPCP as much as it applies because we’ve chosen an unified approach towards structuring our component styles.
- **Increased maintainability and readability**. With PPCP, we change custom property values as close to the base component level as possible and nearly flattening the cascade. This ensures that we keep the cascade as simple as possible, increasing readability, making maintenance easier, and decreasing the potential for styling conflicts in the process.

#### Secondary benefits
- **Prepare us for native CSS component styles**. Adopting a PPCP approach gives us the opportunity to reduce our dependency on a preprocessor and anticipate a future where a preprocessor is entirely unnecessary.

### Additional info

> Inspiration for this approach initially came from [Lea Verou’s presentation titled “CSS Variable Secrets at CSS Day 2022](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZuZizqDF4q8&amp;ab_channel=WebConferencesAmsterdam)

Reviewer 2: ultra nit: we can simplify the link a bit for a slightly cleaner source code (source: visiting this link and using YouTube's "Share" button)

```suggestion
Inspiration for this approach initially came from [Lea Verou’s presentation titled “CSS Variable Secrets at CSS Day 2022](https://youtu.be/ZuZizqDF4q8)
```

#### See also

> [Stacks components _style-template.less](https://github.com/StackExchange/Stacks/blob/develop/lib/css/components/_styles-template.less)

Reviewer 2: Personally, I'm in favor of adding code samples at the bottom here. GH assigns ids to all of its headers, so we could even hand wire up a little table of contents here if the snippets make the ADR too long. Alternatively, we could take advantage of some commonmark/html rendering edge cases with `<details>` to shorten things up a bit (note the carefully placed whitespace to terminate the html_block tokens):

~~~markdown
<details><summary>Component template</summary>

```less
.s-component-name {
    foo: bar;
}
```

</details>
~~~
